2.0 Migration guide(s) (#2776)
Qiskit/documentation: docs/migration-guides/qiskit-2.0.mdx

Reviewer: We can probably just flatten the `qiskit-2.0-features.mdx` file into this one.

---
title: Qiskit 2.0 migration guide

> description: How to update your project so that it works with Qiskit 2.0.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
description: How to update your project so that it works with Qiskit v2.0.
```

---

> {/* cspell:ignore nbqa, ipynb, tqdm */}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{/* cspell:ignore nbqa, ipynb, tqdm, featureful */}
```

# Qiskit v2.0 migration guide

Qiskit v2.0 is the next step within the Qiskit SDK's newly stabilized lifecycle. 
This major version does break compatibility with previous versions of Qiskit, but, 

> compared to the v1.0 release, doesn't involve any changes in the packaging structure. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
unlike the v1.0 release, doesn't involve any changes in the packaging structure. 
```

> # Qiskit 2.0 migration guide
> 
> Qiskit 2.0 is the next step within the Qiskit SDK's newly stabilized lifecycle. 
> This major version does break compatibility with previous versions of Qiskit, but, 
> compared to the v1.0 release, doesn't involve any changes in the packaging structure. 
> 
> This guide describes migration paths for the most important feature changes in Qiskit 2.0, organized by module.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Qiskit v2.0 migration guide

Qiskit v2.0 is the next step within the Qiskit SDK's newly stabilized lifecycle. 
This major version does break compatibility with previous versions of Qiskit, but, 
compared to the v1.0 release, doesn't involve any changes in the packaging structure. 

This guide describes migration paths for the most important feature changes in Qiskit v2.0, organized by module.
```

<span id="qiskit.circuit"></span>
## qiskit.circuit

<span id="c_if"></span>
### Removal of legacy `c_if` conditions

Classical conditions in Qiskit have been preferentially represented by the instruction [`IfElseOp`](/api/qiskit/qiskit.circuit.IfElseOp) since before Qiskit v1.0.
These operations are typically added to a [`QuantumCircuit`](/api/qiskit/qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit) by using the [`if_test`](/api/qiskit/qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit#qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.if_test) method as a context manager.

This also means that the [`Instruction`](/api/qiskit/qiskit.circuit.Instruction) no longer has a `condition` attribute, and that you cannot chain `c_if` calls on the output of a [`QuantumCircuit`](/api/qiskit/qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit) gate-creating method call.

The only instructions that might have a condition now are [`IfElseOp`](/api/qiskit/qiskit.circuit.IfElseOp) and [`WhileLoopOp`](/api/qiskit/qiskit.circuit.WhileLoopOp).
The most correct way to test for a condition is to use an `isinstance` check to validate that you have the correct class.

> If you want to support the legacy `Instruction.condition` attribute during your library's transition to Qiskit v2.0 and above, you can use `getattr(operation, "condition", None)`, which will typically cause `Instruction` instances to behave as they did in Qiskit v1.x and before.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you want to support the legacy `Instruction.condition` attribute during your library's transition to Qiskit v2.0 and later, you can use `getattr(operation, "condition", None)`, which will typically cause `Instruction` instances to behave as they did in Qiskit v1.x and earlier.
```

```python
from qiskit.circuit import QuantumCircuit, QuantumRegister, ClassicalRegister

qr = QuantumRegister(2, "q")
cr = ClassicalRegister(2, "c")
qc = QuantumCircuit(qr, cr)
qc.h(0)
qc.h(1)
qc.measure(qr, cr)

# Apply an X to qubit 0 if both measurements were 1.
with qc.if_test((cr, 3)):
    qc.x(0)
```

Note that in this form, you can also have the conditional gate access to multiple operations (simply add more into the indented block) without re-evaluating the conditions.
You can also provide an ``else`` statement, and use more complex conditional logic:

```python
from qiskit.circuit import QuantumCircuit
from qiskit.circuit.classical import expr

qc = QuantumCircuit(2, 2)
qc.h(0)
qc.h(1)
qc.measure(qc.qubits, qc.clbits)

# Apply an X to qubit 0 if both measurements were the same:
with qc.if_test(expr.equal(qc.clbits[0], qc.clbits[1])) as else_:
    qc.x(0)
# ... or apply a Y to both qubits otherwise:
with else_:
    qc.y(0)
    qc.y(1)
```

<span id="instruction_durations"></span>
### Removal of `Instruction.duration` and `Instruction.unit`

> Circuit [`Instruction`](/api/qiskit/qiskit.circuit.Instruction) objects used to have attributes called `duration` and `unit`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Circuit [`Instruction`](/api/qiskit/qiskit.circuit.Instruction) objects previously had attributes called `duration` and `unit`.
```

> These no longer exist in Qiskit 2.0.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These no longer exist in Qiskit v2.0.
```

This is because the field generally only duplicated information that was a fixed property of hardware, and was stored explicitly in the [`Target`](/api/qiskit/qiskit.transpiler.Target).
Storing the information separately for each individual instruction significantly increased the memory demands of Qiskit and slowed down even circuit operations that did not directly need to touch the information.

> The [`Delay`](/api/qiskit/qiskit.circuit#delay) instruction still contains these fields, as does the new-in-2.0 [`BoxOp`](/api/qiskit/qiskit.circuit#box), because these instructions have a _variable_ delay.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The [`Delay`](/api/qiskit/qiskit.circuit#delay) instruction still contains these fields, as does the new-in-v2.0 [`BoxOp`](/api/qiskit/qiskit.circuit#box), because these instructions have a _variable_ delay.
```

> The [`Delay`](/api/qiskit/circuit#delay) instruction still contains these fields, as does the new-in-v2.0 [`BoxOp`](/api/qiskit/qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit#box), because these instructions have a _variable_ delay.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [`Delay`](/api/qiskit/circuit#delay) instruction still contains these fields, as does the new-in-v2.0 [`BoxOp`](/api/qiskit/circuit#BoxOp), because these instructions have a _variable_ delay.
```

though this will still be a broken link until the 2.0 API docs deploy (as the current one is).  I don't know what development process you want here.  One possibility is to remove the link, merge the docs, and then re-add the link once the 2.0 API docs are live.

Reviewer 3: Qiskit 2.0 docs will be merged in about 2-3 minutes (but not deployed to prod yet)

Author: API docs just got merged and this link should work now

Reviewer: The link before my suggestion and after my suggestion should both work, but my suggestion is the correct one for this particular link text.

Reviewer: (I can't merge suggestions or push to the branch - I don't have write permissions on this repo. [Elena pushed my commits up directly to the branch on my behalf haha.])

To do this, index the [`Target`](/api/qiskit/qiskit.transpiler.Target) first with the operation's name, and then the indices of the hardware qubits as a tuple.
This will return either `None` (if the instruction is supported, but no specific properties were assigned to it), or an [`InstructionProperties`](/api/qiskit/qiskit.transpiler.InstructionProperties) instance, from which the [`duration`](/api/qiskit/qiskit.transpiler.InstructionProperties#qiskit.transpiler.InstructionProperties.duration) field may provide the duration in seconds (or `None`, if not supplied).

```python
target = "<some Target from a hardware vendor>"

# Query the duration of a CX instruction on hardware qubits (2, 4),
# returning `None` if the duration is not specified.
properties = target["cx"][2, 4]
duration = None if properties is None else properties.duration

# You can also do this in one step, using `getattr`:
duration = getattr(target["cx"][2, 4], "duration", None)
```

In general, as classical control-flow becomes more common within circuit executions, the "duration" of a circuit will become less and less well defined.

> While Qiskit 2.x still includes the [`QuantumCircuit.duration`](/api/qiskit/qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit#qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.duration) attribute, we encourage you to move away from it, as it will likely be removed in the future; the assumptions under which it is valid will be violated more and more frequently.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While Qiskit v2.x still includes the [`QuantumCircuit.duration`](/api/qiskit/qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit#qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.duration) attribute, we encourage you to move away from it, as it will likely be removed in the future; the assumptions under which it is valid will be violated more and more frequently.
```

> While Qiskit v2.x still includes the [`QuantumCircuit.duration`](/api/qiskit/qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit#qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.duration) attribute, we encourage you to move away from it, as it will likely be removed in the future; the assumptions under which it is valid will be violated more and more frequently.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While Qiskit v2.x still includes the [`QuantumCircuit.duration`](/api/qiskit/qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit#qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit.duration) attribute, it is recommended to move away from it, as it will likely be removed in the future; the assumptions under which it is valid will be violated more and more frequently.
```

- the [`QuantumCircuit`](/api/qiskit/qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit) methods `has_calibration_for` and `add_calibration`.
- the [`DAGCircuit`](/api/qiskit/qiskit.dagcircuit.DAGCircuit) method `has_calibration_for`.
- the transpiler passes `PulseGates`, `RXCalibrationBuilder`, `RZXCalibrationBuilder`, `EchoRZXWeylDecomposition`, `ValidatePulseGates`.
- the module `qiskit.scheduler` and all its contents.
- the [`BackendV2`](/api/qiskit/qiskit.providers.BackendV2) methods `instruction_schedule_map`, `drive_channel`, `measure_channel`, `acquire_channel` and `control_channel`.
- the [`Target`](/api/qiskit/qiskit.transpiler.Target) methods `has_calibration`, `get_calibration`, `instruction_schedule_map` and `update_from_instruction_schedule_map`.
- the `inst_map` argument of [`generate_preset_pass_manager`](/api/qiskit/qiskit.transpiler.generate_preset_pass_manager), [`transpile`](/api/qiskit/qiskit.compiler.transpile), and [`Target.from_configuration`](/api/qiskit/qiskit.transpiler.Target#qiskit.transpiler.Target.from_configuration).
- the `calibration` field of [`InstructionProperties`](/api/qiskit/qiskit.transpiler.InstructionProperties).

> This happened because IBM Quantum devices ceased to offer pulse-level access, and the Qiskit team no longer had resources to maintain the little used package.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This happened because IBM Quantum&reg; QPUs ceased to offer pulse-level access, and the Qiskit team no longer had resources to maintain the little-used package.
```

> You can continue to use the `qiskit.pulse` module while using the v1.x series of Qiskit, which has bugfix support until September 2024 and security support until March 2025, but the module is removed from the v2.x series.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can continue to use the `qiskit.pulse` module while using the v1.x series of Qiskit, which has bug-fix support until September 2024 and security support until March 2025, but the module is removed from the v2.x series.
```

> You can continue to use the `qiskit.pulse` module while using the 1.x series of Qiskit, which has bugfix support until September 2024 and security support until March 2025, but the module is removed from the 2.x series.
> 
> Most uses of `qiskit.pulse` can be replaced with direct access to fractional gates on IBM Quantum Heron QPUs (and later generations, if applicable).
> You can read more in [the migration guide for converted pulse usage to fractional gates](/migration-guides/pulse-migration).
> 
> You can no longer load QPY files that contain `ScheduleBlock` objects in Qiskit 2.0 because of the removal of Qiskit Pulse.
> You can continue to load these files in the Qiskit 1.x series.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can continue to use the `qiskit.pulse` module while using the v1.x series of Qiskit, which has bugfix support until September 2024 and security support until March 2025, but the module is removed from the v2.x series.

Most uses of `qiskit.pulse` can be replaced with direct access to fractional gates on IBM Quantum Heron QPUs (and later generations, if applicable).
You can read more in [the migration guide for converted pulse usage to fractional gates](/migration-guides/pulse-migration).

You can no longer load QPY files that contain `ScheduleBlock` objects in Qiskit v2.0 because of the removal of Qiskit Pulse.
You can continue to load these files in the Qiskit v1.x series.
```
